notebooks for testing different potential methods for delineating the valley
floor given a cross section

Intro 
---

A valley is simply the low lying area between sloping higher areas.  In
landscapes valleys are all over the place and at many different scales.
Despite having similar shapes, these forms aren't the same thing just at
different sizes - they form by different processes, evolve over different
rates, have differences in form, and interact with other landscape elements in
different ways.

Valleys can be usually be dissassembled into two basic components: the valley
floor and the valley walls. The valley floor is the lowest lying part of the
valley. Usually it is relatively flat, forming a planar surface that slopes
down valley.  We can imagine that in some cases, there is no distinct valley
floor. Instead, there is simply the point at which the valley sides converge.
The most ubiquitous example of this is in the upper reaches of a mountaineous
catchment, where a river has cut deeply into the landscape and the steep sides
converge directly to the river (a classic V-shaped valley).  In those cases, we
can treat the point of convergence (the channel) as the valley floor.

The valley floor ends where it meets the valley walls. The valley walls are the
relatively steep slopes of the valley. The valley walls are hillslopes in the
landscape. Their steepness, profile shape, planform shape, orientation, and
other metrics can vary considerabely across landscapes. Often times there is a
clear visual distinction between the slopes of the hillslopes and the floor. 

For river scientists, the boundary between the valley floor and the valley wall
is significant. This boundary represents the maximum extent in which the river
directly can operate. For example the maximum range in which it can meander,
the extent to which it can flood, etc. As a result, it can be seen as the
maximum boundary of the riparian zone as well.

Deciding where the valley floor ends and the valley wall begins can be complex
for many valleys we can observe in landscapes. One challenge may be that there
is no clear break in the slope between the valley floor and the wall. Another
challenge is that the stream has incised a valley within the valley. The stream
may be very entrenched. There may be other landforms within the valley floor
that can potentially be mistaken for the valley wall - high terraces, levees,
road cuts, morraine deposits parallel to the valley walls, islands -
depositional features from river processes, or erosional - e.g. roche
moutonnee. 


Approach 
--- 

The technique finds points that represent the start of the valley
wall from cross section profiles without having to know the maximum floor angle
or the wall slope angle in advance. Additionally it can handle complexity in
the topography of the valley floor - islands, levees, terraces.



